

2
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
Contents
Background ......................................................................................................................................................3
AI Threats and Risks ........................................................................................................................................3
AI as a Subsystem..........................................................................................................................................................3
AI as Human Augmentation..........................................................................................................................................4
AI with Agency................................................................................................................................................................5
Regulatory Approaches .....................................................................................................................................5
Proposed Elements of a Regulatory Framework for AI Security..................................................................................7
Regulatory considerations for AI as a component or subsystem...............................................................................7
Regulatory considerations for AI implementations that aim to augment human capabilities.................................9
Regulatory considerations for AI implementations that have agency ......................................................................10
About MITRE ..................................................................................................................................................12
About The Authors .........................................................................................................................................13
Endnotes ........................................................................................................................................................13

3
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
Background
Over the past ten years, and more visibly over the past 
six months, artificial intelligence (AI) has gone through 
tremendous technological advancement. In 2012, 
advances in graphics processing units (GPUs) enabled 
the first example of tractably training a deep neural 
network to outperform more traditional approaches 
to machine learning. In 2017, Google researchers 
published their paper on transformer networks that 
provided the building blocks for large language models 
(LLMs). These breakthroughs, along with many other 
innovations, resulted in machine capabilities such as:
• Improved machine perception that for certain
tasks can exceed human cognitive visual
performance.
• Optimization and planning engines that
leverage reinforcement learning to exceed
human performance in complex games.
• Generative algorithms that can create text,
audio, and images that in many cases are
indistinguishable from those created by
humans without targeted analysis.
Collectively, these advancements lead many to believe 
that artificial general intelligence (AGI) is just around 
the corner. At the same time, AI is increasingly being 
recognized as a revolutionary technology that can aid 
the government in addressing critical, mission-oriented 
challenges, ranging from healthcare to national security.
With any new, disruptive technology, humanity looks 
at how to shape its development and application. With 
AI, these discussions range from geopolitical—how AI 
affects the balance of power between the United States 
and China, to existential—that a super-intelligent AI may 
be a threat to humanity itself.
Given the exponential pace of technological 
advancement, both excitement and anxiety about the 
formation of superintelligence are endemic across the 
tech and policy ecosystems.
Within this paper, we explore potential options for AI 
regulation and make recommendations on how to 
establish guardrails to shape the development and 
use of AI.
AI Threats and Risks
Any attempt to secure or regulate a new technology 
should be informed by its vulnerabilities, threats 
that exploit those vulnerabilities either intentionally 
or unintentionally, and the ultimate risk of damage, 
harm, or loss to human life, health, property, or the 
environment. This conceptualization facilitates effective 
threat modeling and risk management.
The national dialogue often lumps together a wide 
range of algorithmic technologies under AI, which can 
confuse this analysis. Here, we divide the AI ecosystem 
into three broad categories based on how AI can be 
manifest in application: 
1. Engineered systems that use
AI as a component or subsystem
2. AI as an augmentation of human capabilities
3. AI operating autonomously under
its own agency
Differentiating these categories is important because 
the threats and risks differ based on how AI manifests 
in applications, as do the approaches to mitigating 
threats and risks.
AI as a Subsystem
AI is embedded in many software systems. Discrete 
AI models routinely perform machine perception and 
optimization functions, from face recognition in photos 
uploaded to the cloud, to dynamically allocating and 
optimizing network resources in 5G wireless networks.
There are a wide range of vulnerabilities and threats 
against these types of AI subsystems—from data 
poisoning attacks to adversarial input attacks—that 
can be used to manipulate subsystems, with the goal 
of having a deterministic and malicious impact on the 
1
2
3

4
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
target system. While the overall software system has 
its own vulnerabilities, those vulnerabilities can now 
be mostly understood through traditional test and 
evaluation, validation and verification, and cybersecurity 
lenses. The introduction of an AI subsystem may 
introduce new, unknown, and unique vulnerabilities 
that are largely unexplored at this point. Tools are 
emerging to identify and protect against new and 
existing threats. For example, MITRE works closely with 
industry and government to capture such threats and 
document associated adversary tactics, techniques, 
and procedures in the MITRE Adversarial Threat 
Landscape for Artificial-Intelligence Systems (ATLAS)™ 
framework.1 Building on ATLAS and in partnership with 
Microsoft, MITRE released tools to perform red team 
testing of converged AI-cyber systems as Arsenal.2 
Meanwhile, a decade of research into AI assurance 
is now turning into robust industry best practices 
such as model cards that establish the boundaries of 
an AI model’s use and can help inform developers, 
policymakers, ethicists, and users.3 
MITRE defines AI assurance as a lifecycle process that 
provides justified confidence in an AI system’s ability 
to operate effectively with acceptable levels of risk to 
its stakeholders. An AI system operating effectively 
means that it meets its functional requirements with 
valid outputs. The risks that need to be managed within 
acceptable levels may be associated with or stem from 
a variety of factors depending on the use context, 
including but not limited to AI system safety, security, 
equity, reliability, interpretability, robustness, privacy, 
and governability.
As this definition suggests, assuring AI necessitates 
that digital systems with AI-based components and 
subsystems have a full lifecycle of scrutiny. The National 
Institute of Standards and Technology’s (NIST) AI Risk 
Management Framework (RMF)4 is a good example 
of an approach that incorporates trustworthiness 
considerations into AI design, development, use, and 
evaluation of AI system components. 
While many open questions remain in this domain, 
such as user data privacy rights, AI assurance 
researchers and practitioners have useful framings of 
the problem to mitigate threats and manage risks.
AI as Human Augmentation
Another application of AI is in augmenting human 
performance, allowing a person to operate with 
much larger scope and scale. This has wide-ranging 
implications for workforce planning as AI has the 
potential to increase productivity and shift the 
composition of labor markets, similar to the role of 
automation in the manufacturing industry. 
LLMs are front and center in this debate, as they 
demonstrate human-level performance in myriad white 
collar job tasks. However, a growing concern is that 
bad actors are augmenting their adversarial capabilities 
by leveraging AI, especially in cyber operations and 
mis/disinformation.
For cyber operations, LLMs could be immediately 
useful in identifying vulnerabilities in computer systems, 
from software bugs to configuration errors. Additionally, 
they could make an efficient “co-pilot” in planning 
and executing cyber operations by synthesizing large 
amounts of network metadata and using that context 
to efficiently propose courses of action weighed by the 
likelihood of success in exploiting a computer network. 
These types of systems could emerge and be used in 
active cyber conflict before the end of 2023.
For mis/disinformation, the generative nature of LLMs 
also makes them well-suited for generating high-quality 
content quickly, from phishing email campaigns to 
nation-state propaganda. While sophisticated hackers 
and military information operations can already 
generate believable content today using techniques 
such as computer-generated imagery, LLMs will make 
that capability available to anyone, while increasing the 
scope and scale at which the professionals can operate.

5
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
While neither cyber attacks nor the spread of mis/
disinformation represent new classes of activity, 
disruptive AI technologies, such as LLMs, will likely 
cause their further proliferation.
AI with Agency
A segment of the tech community is increasingly 
concerned about scenarios where sophisticated AI 
could operate as an independent, goal-seeking agent. 
While science fiction historically embodied this AI 
in anthropomorphic robots, the AI we have today is 
principally confined to digital and virtual domains.
One scenario is an AI model given a specific adversarial 
agenda. Stuxnet is perhaps an early example of 
sophisticated, AI-fueled, goal-seeking malware with an 
arsenal of zero-day attacks that ended up escaping 
onto the internet.
5 While no LLMs were involved, and its 
autonomy logic was modest by modern standards, it is 
nonetheless an example of autonomous malware.
Perhaps the recent equivalent of this is Auto-GPT, 
where a user can express a goal in natural language, 
and it uses GPT-4 to divide that task into sub-tasks 
and uses the internet to accomplish them.
6 While some 
are using Auto-GPT for tasks like personal finance 
optimization, Chaos-GPT is an example of an instance 
with the potential for nefarious intent and the goal of 
exterminating humanity.7 
Another theorized scenario is that an Auto-GPT–like 
system might independently develop a sub-task that 
prioritizes harming humanity.
8 Ironically, AI developing 
such a sub-task would most likely be based on or 
inspired by human-generated content that serves as 
input to the AI, since AI does not have any inherent 
goal or purpose. While many dismiss such a concern 
as hypothetical science fiction, it may not matter if 
people develop things like Chaos-GPT intentionally.
However, an AI application like Chaos-GPT still 
interacts with the world through the same interfaces as 
humans. Anything it can do over the internet, a rogue 
nation-state could theoretically also do with human 
fingers on a keyboard, though the AI and associated 
automation accelerates timelines and increases the 
scale of the threat. Therefore, it is even more essential 
to make sure the safety-critical cyber-physical systems 
that control our environment are secure against 
exploitation. Because whether it’s a human, an AI-
augmented human, or a malicious AI agent, they all 
rely on the same tactics, techniques, and procedures 
to exploit our infrastructure.
Regulatory Approaches
A debate about how to regulate AI has captured 
the nation’s attention, and there is no shortage of 
approaches attempting to address concerns raised in 
each of the three categories outlined above: AI as a 
subsystem, AI as human augmentation, and AI with 
agency. 
In April, the Future of Life Institute published a 
set of recommendations for policymaking that 
are representative of many of the concepts being 
considered:
9
1. “Mandate robust third-party auditing
and certification.
2. Regulate access to computational power.
3. Establish capable AI agencies
at the national level.
4. Establish liability for AI-caused harms.
5. Introduce measures to prevent and track
AI model leaks.
6. Expand technical AI safety research funding.
7. Develop standards for identifying and
managing AI-generated content and
recommendations.”
Lawmakers are also debating concepts such as 
including protections for personal data and building 
transparency guidelines so that there is clear 
1
2
3
4
5
7
6

6
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
accounting for what data is being used to train AI 
models; establishing common definitions for AI models, 
applications, and capabilities; strengthening the AI 
workforce; and licensing AI models.
Some of these regulatory concepts have merit but 
others may limit competition and advancement, weaken 
international leadership, or establish regulatory controls 
without necessary sector context. The multi-million-
dollar cost to train an LLM from scratch, restricting 
research and development10 primarily to the major 
tech companies and well-funded startups, like OpenAI, 
surfaces additional dilemmas for policymakers:
• Big tech companies have a monopoly on the
future of AI, with their large budgets preventing
startups and competitors from advancing as
quickly, and potentially giving a small number
of companies a disproportionate influence on
AI-generated content.
• Efforts to regulate AI could be meaningfully
advanced by engaging with only a handful of
key tech companies, such as attendees of the
White House meeting in early May.
11
• Competition between China and the United
States on AI can be meaningfully measured by
comparing the progress of U.S. hyperscalers,
service providers that offer massive, elastic
computing resources, to that of Chinese
hyperscalers.
MITRE would discourage focusing regulations only on 
big tech, as open-source innovation in AI has enabled 
smaller companies to have greater access to AI tools 
and technologies. 
Furthermore, AI is on a short list of technologies being 
competed internationally, with outcomes over the next 
several years defining how well individual countries 
will be able to protect their national and economic 
securities. The United States cannot cede international 
leadership on this important technology. Instead, we 
must find a way to navigate our interest in advancing a 
new generation of technologies within an appropriate 
regulatory framework.
Illustrating that point, many have latched onto the 
second recommendation above, which seeks to 
regulate access to computational power. Producing and 
using GPUs is more visible and feasible by fewer state 
and non-state actors than enriching uranium,
12 inciting 
an international arms control regime around GPUs.13 
Presuming international treaties around such an arms 
control regime are agreed upon, then members of the 
international community should be prepared to use 
all levers at their disposal, including kinetic force, to 
prevent nations from training too sophisticated of an AI 
model.
14 
The major challenge with compute as the regulatory 
throttle is that we have already seen innovation that 
reduces reliance on compute, so this also appears to 
be a misguided approach to regulation.
15 Moreover, 
such a regulatory mechanism would be exceedingly 
challenging to implement on a global scale, and if 
only partially implemented, could give our adversaries 
a competitive advantage and adversely affect our 
security.
Congressional hearings on this topic in May surfaced 
the challenges of developing actionable policy to 
address these concepts. A variety of factors concerning 
regulation have been considered in previous studies,
16 
and these factors suggest the key questions to be 
addressed in an analysis: 
• What are the objects to be regulated? There is
no single, widely accepted definition of AI, and
there are many choices for what to regulate (e.g.,
data, algorithms, testing, market access).
• What are the problems regulation is intended
to address? Concerns can range from
considerations like accountability, discrimination,
and privacy to technical issues like dependability,
transparency, and accuracy.

7
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
• What is the most appropriate governance
mechanism? Proposals have been offered,
ranging from voluntary self-regulation to
government-mandated policies and procedures.
• What concrete regulatory instruments are
appropriate for achieving which purposes?
Regulatory actions have been discussed for
safety and accountability (bans, approvals,
standards for design, liability standards, third-
party auditing and certification, etc.), for
transparency (disclosure of technical details,
explanations for decisions, disclosure of where AI
is used), and for the involvement of stakeholders
(researchers, developers, users).
Proposals to establish a single federal agency focused 
on regulating and licensing AI miss the fact that AI 
is, or soon will be, a fundamental element to most 
aspects of technology. It would be more scalable and 
less duplicative to focus AI regulation on the point at 
which AI intersects a regulated industry. For example, 
rather than a new agency regulating AI in general, the 
Food and Drug Administration could extend its current 
“Software as a Medical Device” regime to cover AI-
enabled software in a healthcare setting. While these 
existing regulators will all need to beef up their AI 
expertise, they can leverage their existing deep domain 
expertise to better contextualize regulation and licensing.
The three operational categories discussed on page 
3
 will have unique regulatory considerations. This is 
further discussed in the next section.
Proposed Elements of a Regulatory 
Framework for AI Security
This paper’s focus is primarily on AI security, and 
hence we propose elements of a regulatory framework 
based on a vulnerability, threat, and risk calculus. 
Risks are realized when threat
 actors (intentional or 
not) exploit vulnerabilities. We intersect this calculus 
w
ith our AI technology space decomposition of AI as 
a s
ubsystem, AI augmenting humans, and AI with 
agency. While there are several actions that need to be 
taken across this matrix, the table below highlights the 
three that are most critical for immediate action. 
Regulatory considerations for AI 
as a component or subsystem 
1. Any AI regulation should require AI
components to satisfy software assurance
requirements as well as AI-specific assurance
requirements that can be developed based on
validated AI assurance frameworks.
When considering AI capabilities embedded as a 
component in some larger engineered system, it is 
important to first recognize that the AI component is a 
piece of software. Whatever software engineering best 
practices and regulatory requirements are enforced 
for the larger system should also be enforced for the 
AI component. This can sometimes be a challenge, 
though, since AI software exposes new vulnerabilities that 
differ from traditional software risks (e.g., lack of testing 
standards, lack of widely accepted code development 
practices, reliance on training data and other external 
information influencing program behavior).
1
AI RisksAI ThreatsAI 
Vulnerabilities
Reduce 
vulnerabilities by 
enhancing 
industry-specific 
approaches
AI as a 
Subsystem
Limit threat and 
hence risk 
scaling through 
human penalty, 
supported by 
increased 
auditability
AI
Augmenting 
Humans
Reduce risks  
via critical 
infrastructure 
hardening and 
enable safe 
research 
AI with 
Agency

8
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
1. Regulated industries should develop a NIST
AI RMF response plan; if they deem the NIST
AI RMF insufficient, they should identify
alternative AI assurance approaches.
The NIST AI RMF shows how to systematically think 
about risk during the design, development, and 
deployment of an AI system. Though compliance with 
the NIST framework is voluntary, it is an important first 
step toward identifying where regulatory mandates 
might eventually be required. Regulated industries, 
particularly those involving higher risks, should develop a 
response that outlines how they intend to apply the NIST 
framework to their sector.
2. Any AI regulation should account for and
mitigate risks stemming from component
interactions.
Many AI components are designed and implemented as 
integrated systems that leverage several AI technologies, 
along with more conventional methods, to perform 
a computation. One of the lessons learned from 
experiences with safety-critical software applications
17 
is that accidents and failures involving complex 
software systems are much more likely to result from 
dysfunctional interactions among components than from 
individual component failure. The interactions and tight 
coupling among subcomponents in an AI system can 
be a source of vulnerability to threats and risks for use/
misuse that may require management and regulation. 
Consequently, it may be prudent to view component 
interactions as regulatory objects subject to testing 
standards and assurance management requirements.
3. Any AI regulation should require “assurance
cases” to be developed before deployment.
Another insight from the safety-critical software 
community is that best practices, technology 
improvements, standards, and testing are all necessary 
but not sufficient to provide adequate assurance 
guarantees. It is important to rigorously tie all these 
factors together into “assurance cases”
18,19 that assess 
2
3
4
the risks of failures and harmful outcomes before a 
system is deployed. An assurance case is a documented 
body of evidence that provides a compelling argument 
that the system satisfies certain critical assurance 
properties in specific contexts. It includes explicit 
claims about critical system assurance properties and 
behavior boundaries, evidence for these claims, and a 
rigorous argument that demonstrates that the evidence 
is sufficient to establish the validity of the claims. 
AI systems have specialized concerns from an 
assurance perspective. For example, an assurance 
case for a machine learning system might describe 
the intended performance envelope of the system for 
a given input distribution and identify mechanisms to 
detect violations of the data assumptions and issue 
alerts. Note that an assurance case for an AI system 
would go beyond the information available in something 
like a model card, since the assurance case would 
use the evidence to build an argument focused on 
convincing stakeholders that an assurance claim is true.
4. Any AI regulation should account for use
context and favor existing domain-specific
regulations.
For regulation, the context in which an AI component 
is used is as important as the aforementioned 
software perspectives. Existing regulated sectors or 
industries consider the deployment context for an 
application. Given this, when an AI-enabled application 
is deployed in a regulated sector or industry, AI 
regulation should first be addressed through existing 
regulatory frameworks in that domain. Many issues 
regarding performance standards, oversight, and legal 
responsibilities can be handled with existing regulations 
and laws, though some maturation of requirements 
may be needed to deal with particular concerns of 
AI-enabled components (e.g., transparency, post-
deployment monitoring) There is a need for regulatory 
flexibility to accommodate a rapidly changing 
technology where innovations continually challenge 
expectations about what is possible.
5

9
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
5. Industry regulators should conduct continuous
regulatory analysis of individual use cases.
Recommendations for regulatory action will change 
as aspects of the technology and use case change 
over time. One way to address this challenge is to 
conduct a regulatory analysis of the factors influencing 
regulatory decisions and their interdependencies, 
then use that analysis to organize policy questions 
and craft appropriate regulations to match the 
properties of each use case. This will help avoid 
regulatory actions that take an inflexible one-size-fits-
all approach. Those processes should also explore 
how emerging AI solutions impact citizens, commerce, 
and government and identify— in parallel with AI 
solution development— associated governance needs 
such as defining application-specific assurance 
requirements and overseeing compliance. As the AI 
assurance regulatory space is populated, agencies 
can continuously monitor and bridge emerging 
disconnects between existing AI governance and the 
risks introduced by new AI solutions through rapid 
adaptations. This is particularly relevant for a rapidly 
developing technology such as AI and may require AI 
assistance to accomplish.
6. Industry regulators should promote trusted
information sharing mechanisms to support
regulatory analysis.
Even a simple analytic step like establishing a common 
vocabulary that links use case attributes to harmful 
outcomes and effective mitigations can provide 
important leverage for assurance. For example, MITRE’s 
ATT&CK
® framework, a globally-accessible knowledge 
base, describes cyber threat use cases using carefully 
selected attributes that make it possible to link use 
cases with appropriate response actions in a systematic 
manner. MITRE’s ATLAS framework extends that type 
of aggregation to AI systems. Such information sharing 
facilitates pattern detection across use case types and 
identification of plausible candidate actions for new use 
cases involving technology innovations. That body of 
6
7
knowledge can potentially form the basis for crafting 
regulatory actions like certifications for systems claiming 
to provide certain kinds of cyber defense capabilities. 
The Federal Aviation Administration’s Aviation Safety 
Information Analysis and Sharing, or ASIAS, data 
sharing initiative in the aviation industry may also 
provide guidelines for how to proceed.
Regulatory considerations for AI 
implementations that aim to augment 
human capabilities
7. AI regulation should require system
auditability in order to hold individuals who
misuse AI to cause harm accountable.
When the augmented human is a bad actor with ill 
intent, the potential harms that bad actor can realize 
are amplified. This scaling of the threat, and hence 
risk, is much more tangible and plausible in the near 
term than the risk of AI rapidly evolving into AGI taking 
on systematic ill intent toward its surroundings and 
the human race. This risk also essentially originates 
from humans and the intent to do harm—defrauding, 
cyber hacking for financial or other gain, or causing 
societal uncertainty through social media influence. 
It should also be noted that augmenting humans with 
AI can have a positive effect. For example, increasing 
a pathologist’s ability to find cancer cells through AI 
augmentation has life-saving promise. Given these 
factors, it is not particularly feasible or desirable to 
either limit use of AI in augmenting humans or to 
attempt to hold AI accountable for augmenting a 
human; it would be more effective to penalize and 
deter bad actors with ill intent. Our legal code primarily 
relies on holding humans causing harm with ill intent 
accountable. A key aspect of related regulation should 
focus on enabling system auditability to document 
the intent of humans using AI to cause harm and 
the execution of that ill intent with AI. Without such 
auditability, it would be challenging to argue for 
accountability, and, thus, to establish legal frameworks 
for deterrence. 
8

10
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
8. Legal frameworks to deter intentional and
harmful AI misuse should scale accountability
with risk.
Legal frameworks that may be developed as part of AI 
regulation to hold individuals accountable for causing 
harm with AI should focus on regulatory approaches 
commensurate with the scale of the risk. For example, 
increased legal penalties should be tied to higher 
degrees of harm caused by intentional AI misuse. 
Moreover, regulation should ensure that our legal code 
sufficiently articulates the harms and differentiates 
between intentional acts and “AI accidents,” a concept 
that will evolve as AI technologies advance. 
9. AI regulation should provide appropriate
levels of transparency into AI applications to
an objective third party and/or the public for
detection and mitigation of intentional
A
I misuse.
As discussed on page 4, we view the emerging LLM 
ability to generate realistic, high-quality content as 
having strong potential to sow mis/disinformation and 
adversely influence highly consequential activities like a 
national election. While increasing au
ditability provides 
a legal means for accountability and hence penalty 
and deterrence, those actions lag harms, and today’s 
technologies may enab
le various degrees of anonymity 
despite auditability. This calls for additional regulatory 
approaches that enable near-real-time interventions to 
mitigate risk. Regulation could focus on enabling third-
party watchdog functions by requiring solution providers 
to provide real-time means to transparently monitor 
trends and, potentially, content within privacy bounds. 
Additionally, the ability to automatically detect fake 
content (prose, images, and videos) is nascent and 
requires national research and development 
investment. 
9
10
Regulatory considerations for AI 
implementations that have agency
We expect that risks from a sophisticated AI operating 
with agency and malintent are less likely in the near 
term than those introduced by AI augmenting human 
actors. Regardless, in both cases, the human or 
AI actor must use the same “hands on keyboard” 
mechanisms a rogue nation-state would employ. 
These mechanisms are either intentionally open 
interfaces or more likely vulnerabilities caused by 
poorly designed or implemented systems that expose 
interfaces that can be actuated to cause harm. Of 
particular concern are safety-critical cyber-physical 
systems—those that through a cyber-physical 
interface create the opportunity for injury or death to 
people, the loss or damage of equipment or property, 
or environmental harm. Given the speed at which an 
AI might operate, the threat and risks are amplified; 
hence, additional attention is required to accelerate 
mitigations to counter. 
10. Federal government critical infrastructure
plans should address increased risk due to
AI-enabled scale and speed and consider
countering risk with automated red teaming .
We recommend an assessment of federal government 
critical infrastructure plans focused on identifying 
and strengthening recommendations for safety-
critical cyber-physical systems particularly vulnerable 
to increased threats due to the scale and speed AI 
enables. Additionally, we recommend sector-specific 
use of advancements in automated red teaming 
be considered, to include AI-enabled capabilities. 
For example, CALDERA™
20 aids cybersecurity 
practitioners to automate cybersecurity assessments, 
leveling the asymmetric playing field between hacker 
and defender. These capabilities would benefit from 
increased research and development funding. 
11

11
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
11. Increase federal funding to create common 
vocabulary and frameworks for AI alignment, 
and use those to guide future research. 
As described in earlier sections, we do not 
recommend limiting or regulating scientific 
advancements in AI that move us toward AGI, as 
restrictions will also limit positive advancements with 
the potential for great societal benefits and are likely 
impractical to implement globally. However, creating 
AI alignment in systems as scientific and engineering 
advances are made can mitigate the risk of either 
humans tasking AI to carry out dangerous actions 
or AI systems allowing themselves to have emergent 
behavior. AI alignment research is nascent, and can 
be accelerated with additional research funding, 
first focused on establishing a common vocabulary 
and framework to align the research community and 
to identify research needs. Such a vocabulary and 
framework could subsequently be used by program 
managers who guide federally funded AI research 
to evaluate proposals’ compliance with alignment 
principles, similar to guidelines established for 
research involving human subjects. 
12 12. Regulation and legal frameworks should 
differentiate between appropriate research 
with risk mitigations and bad actors, and hold 
all appropriately accountable for harms. 
We recognize that purpose is an inherently human 
quality, and AI systems with agency will either 
directly get purpose from a human (as instruction) 
or infer purpose through learning from human 
behaviors and artifacts. This is an area of active 
research. Advancements in AI alignment thinking and 
practices may serve to limit emergent, undesirable 
AI behavior, but research activities will still need safe 
environments with regulated guidelines similar to 
bioresearch and biosafety levels. And bad actors will 
undoubtedly try to create autonomous AI systems 
with malintent (e.g., Chaos-GPT). Similar to the 
argument on page 10, policy and regulation can go 
further to hold accountable and impose penalties 
on those that either unintentionally (researchers) or 
intentionally (bad actors) give self-direct AI systems 
goals that lead to harm. 
13

12
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
About MITRE
MITRE’s mission-driven teams are dedicated to solving problems for a safer world. Through our public-private 
partnerships and federally funded R&D centers, we work across government and in partnership with industry to 
tackle challenges to the safety, stability, and well-being of our nation.
About the Authors
T. Charles Clancy, Ph.D., is the senior vice president and general manager, MITRE Labs, and chief futurist, the 
MITRE Corporation. He previously served as MITRE’s vice president for intelligence programs and, before that, as 
the Bradley Distinguished Professor in Cybersecurity at Virginia Tech and executive director of the Hume Center for 
National Security and Technology.
Douglas P. Robbins is the vice president of engineering in MITRE Labs. He leads MITRE’s Innovation Centers 
across a wide range of technologies, including electronics, communications, systems engineering, and artificial 
intelligence. Previously, he served as MITRE’s vice president for Air Force programs. Prior to that assignment, he 
led the strategic development of MITRE’s Massachusetts-based operations, including new partnerships with the 
local high-tech ecosystem.
Ozgur Eris, Ph.D., is the managing director of the Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy Innovation Center in 
MITRE Labs. He leads over 200 artificial intelligence engineers and scientists who are focused on catalyzing 
the consequential use of artificial intelligence for the public good. Previously, he served as the distinguished 
chief engineer of the AI and Autonomy Innovation Center and also established its AI-enhanced Discovery and 
Decisions department.
Lashon B. Booker, Ph.D., is a senior principal scientist in MITRE Labs’ Artificial Intelligence and Autonomy Innovation 
Center. He has published numerous technical papers in the areas of machine learning, adaptive behavior, and 
probabilistic methods for uncertain inference. He has served on the editorial boards of several journals, and regularly 
serves on the program committees for conferences in these areas.
Katie Enos is a senior principal on MITRE’s government relations team. Prior to joining MITRE, she spent several 
years consulting for C-suite executives following an almost two-decade career working on Capitol Hill, including over a 
decade as the chief of staff to a member of the United States Congress.
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank Duane Blackburn; Jason Duncan; Nitin S. Naik, Ph.D., Josh Harguess, Ph.D.; 
Christine Callsen; Christina Liaghati, Ph.D.; and EJ Hillman for their thoughtful input and review of this document.

13
JUNE 2023
MITRE
A SENSIBLE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR AI SECURITY
Endnotes
1 The MITRE Corporation, “MITRE ATLAS,” The MITRE Corporation, April 2023. [Online] 
 Available: https://atlas.mitre.org/. [Accessed 2023].
2 The MITRE Corporation, Microsoft and MITRE Create Tool to Help Security Teams Prepare for Attacks on Machine 
Learning Systems, McLean, VA: The MITRE Corporation, 2023.
3 E. Ozoani, M. Gerchick and M. Mitchell, “Model Cards,” 20 December 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://huggingface.co/blog/model-cards. [Accessed 2023].
4 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), “AI Risk Management Framework,” NIST, 2021. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework. [Accessed 2023].
5 K. Zetter, “An Unprecedented Look at Stuxnet, the World’s First Digital Weapon,” Wired.com, 3 November 2014. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.wired.com/2014/11/countdown-to-zero-day-stuxnet/. [Accessed 2023].
6 K. Wiggers, “What is Auto-GPT and Why Does it Matter?,” Tech Crunch, 22 April 2023. [Online]. 
Available: https://techcrunch.com/2023/04/22/what-is-auto-gpt-and-why-does-it-matter/. [Accessed 2023].
7 J. A. Lanz, “Meet Chaos-GPT: An AI Tool That Seeks to Destroy Humanity,” Yahoo!, 13 April 2023. [Online]. 
Available: https://finance.yahoo.com/news/meet-chaos-gpt-ai-tool-163905518.html. [Accessed 2023].
8 E. Yudkowsky, “Pausing AI Developments Isn’t Enough. We Need to Shut it All Down,” TIME Magazine, 29 March 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://time.com/6266923/ai-eliezer-yudkowsky-open-letter-not-enough/. [Accessed 2023].
9 Future of Life, “Policymaking in the Pause,” 12 April 2023. [Online]. Available: https://futureoflife.org/wp-content/up-
loads/2023/04/FLI_Policymaking_In_The_Pause.pdf. [Accessed 2023].
10 J. Togelius and G. Yannakakis, “Choose Your Weapon: Survival Strategies for Depressed AI Academics,” Cornell Universi-
ty, 31 March 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.06035.pdf [Accessed 2023]. 
11 D. McCabe, “White House Pushes Tech CEOs to Limit Risks of AI,” The New York Times, 4 May 2023. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/04/technology/us-ai-research-regulation.html. [Accessed 2023].
12 M. Baker, “Nuclear Arms Control Verification and Lessons for AI Treaties,” Cornell University, 8 April 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.04123.pdf. [Accessed 2023].
13 S. Nellis and J. Lee, U.S. officials order Nvidia to halt sales of top AI chips to China, San Francisco: Reuters, 2022.
14 E. Yudkowsky, “Pausing AI Developments Isn’t Enough. We Need to Shut it All Down,” TIME Magazine, 29 March 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://time.com/6266923/ai-eliezer-yudkowsky-open-letter-not-enough/. [Accessed 2023].
15 E. Hu, Y. Shen, P . Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang and W. Chen, “LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large 
Lan-Guage Models,” Cornell University, 16 October 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2106.09685.pdf. [Ac-
cessed 2023].
16 A. Folberth, J. Jahnel, J. Bareis, C. Orwat and C. Wadephul, “Tackling Problems, Harvesting Benefits— 
A Systematic Review of the Regulatory Debate Around AI,” Cornell University, 7 September 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.05468. [Accessed 2023]
17 N. Leveson, “System Safety Engineering: Back to the Future,” Massachusetts Institute of Technology Aeronautics and 
Astronautics Department, 2002. [Online]. Available: http://sunnyday.mit.edu/book2.pdf. [Accessed 2023].
18 N. Leveson, “The Use of Safety Cases in Certification and Regulation,” Massachusetts Institute of Technology Engineer-
ing Systems Division, November 2011. [Online]. Available: https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/102833. [Accessed 2023].
19 J. Rushby, “The Interpretation and Evaluation of Assurance,” SRI International, Menlo Park, 2015.
20 The MITRE Corporation, “CALDERA,” The MITRE Corporation, 1997-2023. [Online]. 
Available: https://caldera.mitre.org/. [Accessed 2023].
MITRE’s mission-driven teams are dedicated to solving problems for a safer world. 
Through our public-private partnerships and federally funded R&D centers, we work 
across government and in partnership with industry to tackle challenges to the safety, 
stability, and well-being of our nation.
© 2023 MITRE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE. DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED. PUBLIC RELEASE CASE NUMBER 23-1943
 mitre.org 13